docs/AUDIT_RESULTS.md, before:

## Agent OS System Audit Results

Date: 2025-08-11

This report documents the current state of the Agent OS installation, execution paths, identified problems, and a cleanup and verification plan. Per the audit instructions, no fixes were performed; only observation and documentation.

### 1) Current State Inventory

#### 1.1 Files discovered (aos-related)

```
/Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/.version
/Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh
/Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/tools/aos-background
/Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4
```

#### 1.2 Version files and contents

```
ls -la ~/.agent-os/.version ~/.agent-os/VERSION
.rw-r--r--@ 6 dalecarman 11 Aug 04:53 /Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/.version
.rw-r--r--@ 6 dalecarman 11 Aug 05:01 /Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/VERSION

cat ~/.agent-os/.version
2.1.0

cat ~/.agent-os/VERSION
2.2.0
```

Observation: Two version files exist with different values.

#### 1.3 Shell configuration references

`~/.zshrc` contains quick-init sourcing:

```
# Agent OS Quick Init Alias
if [ -f "$HOME/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh" ]; then
  source "$HOME/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh"
fi
```

`~/.bashrc` contains the same block:

```
# Agent OS Quick Init Alias
if [ -f "$HOME/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh" ]; then
  source "$HOME/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh"
fi
```

#### 1.4 What `aos` resolves to

```
type aos
aos is a shell function from /Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh

alias aos
<no alias defined>

command -v aos-v4
<not on PATH>
```

Observation: `aos` is a shell function (not an alias). It locates and executes `~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4` directly.

#### 1.5 Installation directories and tools

```
ls -la ~/.agent-os
... (includes) ...
.version
VERSION
tools/

ls -la ~/.agent-os/tools
agentos-alias.sh
aos-background
aos-v4
```

#### 1.6 Remote version information (GitHub)

```
GitHub VERSION: 2.2.0
Latest release tag: v2.2.0
```

#### 1.7 CLI status output

```
~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4 status
🔍 Agent OS Status Report
=========================

Global Installation:
✅ Installed at ~/.agent-os
✅ Version is current

Components:
✅ Instructions installed
✅ Standards installed
✅ Workflow modules installed
✅ Hooks installed

Project Setup:
ℹ️  Type: both
⚠️  Issues found:
   ⚠️  Claude commands not configured
   ⚠️  Cursor rules outdated
✅ Product documentation exists

Background Tasks:
ℹ️  Tasks: 0 running, 3 total
```

### 2) Execution Flow Diagram (Actual Behavior)

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  A[User types 'aos'] --> B{Shell resolves}
  B -->|function| C[/~/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh/]
  C --> D{Locate aos-v4}
  D -->|exists| E[/~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4/]
  D -->|not found but on PATH| F[aos-v4]
  D -->|none| G[Download latest aos-v4 to /tmp and execute]
  E --> H[aos-v4 main]
  F --> H[aos-v4 main]
  G --> H[aos-v4 main]

  subgraph aos-v4 key flows
    H --> I[check_for_updates]
    I --> J{Compare versions}
    J -->|current| K[print 'up to date']
    J -->|not installed| L[print 'not installed']
    J -->|outdated| M[smart_update: prompt user]
    M --> N[if yes: curl setup.sh --overwrite | bash]
    N --> O[setup.sh writes ~/.agent-os/VERSION=2.2.0 and installs tools]
  end

  subgraph setup.sh
    O --> P[Download standards/instructions/tools]
    O --> Q[Write VERSION (uppercase)]
    O --> R[Suggest install-aos-alias.sh]
  end
```

Supporting code observations:
- `tools/agentos-alias.sh` defines a shell function `aos` that executes `aos-v4` (or downloads it if missing).
- `tools/aos-v4` function `check_for_updates` reads `~/.agent-os/VERSION` and compares to remote `VERSION` (no use of `~/.agent-os/.version`).
- `setup.sh` writes only `~/.agent-os/VERSION` (uppercase) to `2.2.0` and does not remove `.version`.
- `tools/install-aos-alias.sh` appends a sourcing block to `~/.zshrc`/`~/.bashrc` and checks only for an existing literal function/alias, not for the sourcing block itself.

### 3) Problem Analysis

1. Problem: Dual version files with mismatch
   - Current State: `~/.agent-os/.version` = 2.1.0; `~/.agent-os/VERSION` = 2.2.0
   - Desired State: Only `~/.agent-os/VERSION` exists and is authoritative
   - Impact: Confusion and risk of scripts/tools reading stale `.version`
   - Fix Required: Remove `.version`; standardize all tools on `VERSION` (uppercase). Ensure setup removes `.version`.

2. Problem: `aos` is a shell function (caching risk)
   - Current State: `aos` is defined via `tools/agentos-alias.sh` as a function
   - Desired State: `aos` should be a simple alias to `~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4`
   - Impact: Shell function caching can persist old logic; harder to ensure fresh behavior across sessions
   - Fix Required: Replace function-based approach with alias or direct PATH shim to `aos-v4`; eliminate function to avoid caching issues.

3. Problem: Alias installer can append duplicates
   - Current State: `tools/install-aos-alias.sh` checks for `function aos()` or `alias aos=` but not for the sourcing block marker; if only the sourcing block exists, repeated runs will append duplicates
   - Desired State: Idempotent installer that detects and avoids duplicate blocks (by matching the marker or path)
   - Impact: Multiple identical blocks in `~/.zshrc`/`~/.bashrc`; brittle shell init
   - Fix Required: Update installer to search for the marker/sourcing lines and skip or replace safely.

4. Problem: Update flow interactive prompts can block automation
   - Current State: `smart_update` prompts `[y/N]` twice (update now? and optionally project setup)
   - Desired State: Non-interactive flag to auto-accept, or separate command for unattended updates
   - Impact: Automated update flows (CI/devcontainers/scripts) may hang
   - Fix Required: Add `--yes`/`--non-interactive` to `aos-v4 update` path.

5. Problem: Project vs Global messaging is ambiguous
   - Current State: `status` reports issues like “Claude commands not configured” / “Cursor rules outdated”; menu text says “Project setup needs updates” without specific remediation mapping in CLI
   - Desired State: Clear mapping of reported issues to actionable steps and commands
   - Impact: Users may not understand what to run to resolve reported issues
   - Fix Required: Enhance `check_project_currency` messages and provide automatic or guided remediation steps.

6. Problem: PATH exposure of `aos-v4`
   - Current State: `aos-v4` isn’t placed on PATH; resolution relies on the function wrapper
   - Desired State: Either install a PATH shim (e.g., `~/bin/aos`) or ensure alias points directly to the executable
   - Impact: Tools/scripts that call `aos-v4` by name won’t find it unless through the wrapper
   - Fix Required: Provide a PATH-installed shim or ensure alias-only usage everywhere.

### 4) How It SHOULD Work (Intended Behavior)

#### Version Management
- Single version file: `~/.agent-os/VERSION` (uppercase)
- Format: Semantic versioning like `2.2.0` without `v`
- Updated by: `setup.sh` only
- Read by: All aos tools

#### Command Structure
- `aos` → Shell alias pointing to `~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4`
- No shell functions (to avoid caching issues)
- Direct execution path, no intermediaries

#### Update Flow
1. Check local `VERSION` against GitHub `VERSION`
2. If outdated, download and run `setup.sh`
3. `setup.sh` updates `VERSION`
4. Next check shows "up to date"

#### Project vs Global
- Global: `~/.agent-os/` installation
- Project: `.agent-os/` in current directory
- Clear separation of concerns

### 5) Cleanup Steps

#### Step 1: Remove Redundancies
- [ ] Delete `~/.agent-os/.version` (keep only `VERSION`)
- [ ] Deduplicate any repeated quick-init sourcing blocks in `~/.zshrc` and `~/.bashrc`
- [ ] Verify: Only one version file exists and only one quick-init block remains per shell config

#### Step 2: Standardize Version Checking
- [ ] Ensure all scripts and tooling reference `~/.agent-os/VERSION` only
- [ ] Normalize version format (no `v` prefix internally)
- [ ] Verify: `aos status` shows "Version is current" with a matching local/remote value

#### Step 3: Fix Shell Integration
- [ ] Replace function-based `aos` with a simple alias (or PATH shim) pointing to `aos-v4`
- [ ] Update `install-aos-alias.sh` to be idempotent (detect/avoid duplicate inserts)
- [ ] Verify: New shells resolve `aos` as an alias; no shell function remains

#### Step 4: Improve Update UX
- [ ] Add non-interactive flag for `aos update` to support automation
- [ ] Verify: Running update with a flag performs unattended update and exits 0

#### Step 5: Clarify Project vs Global Remediation
- [ ] Map each `check_project_currency` issue to clear remediation commands in CLI output
- [ ] Verify: `aos status` guidance is actionable and resolves issues when followed

### 6) Verification Checklist

- Version file consistency
  - Run: `ls -la ~/.agent-os/.version ~/.agent-os/VERSION 2>/dev/null`
  - Expect: Only `VERSION` exists; contents match remote `VERSION`

- Shell resolution of `aos`
  - Run: `type aos` and `alias aos`
  - Expect: `aos` is an alias; no shell function

- Update check logic
  - Run: `~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4 status`
  - Expect: "Version is current" when local equals remote

- Alias installer idempotency
  - Run installer twice; grep config for duplicates
  - Expect: Single quick-init block remains

- Automation readiness
  - Run: `aos update --yes` (or equivalent)
  - Expect: No prompts; exit code 0 on success

### 7) Testing Plan (End-to-End Scenarios)

1. Fresh installation
   - Remove `~/.agent-os/`
   - Install via `setup.sh`
   - Verify `VERSION`, tools, and alias installed; `aos status` current

2. Update from an older version
   - Set `VERSION` to an older value
   - Run `aos update` (interactive and non-interactive)
   - Verify `VERSION` updated and status current

3. Project setup (Cursor and/or Claude)
   - Run `setup-cursor.sh` and/or `setup-claude-code.sh`
   - Run `aos status`; follow remediation steps
   - Verify no issues reported after remediation

4. Background tasks
   - Run `aos run 'echo hello && sleep 1'`
   - Verify with `aos tasks`, `aos logs <id>`, and `aos stop <id>`

### 8) Success Criteria (per prompt)

- [x] Every aos-related file is documented
- [x] Execution paths are mapped
- [x] Each problem has a proposed solution
- [x] Each fix includes verification steps
- [x] End-to-end user scenarios are outlined for testing

### Notes

- No changes were made during this audit. All results above are based on observed command output and code inspection.

Commit message:

feat: release v4.0.0 with new guardrails and enhancements
This update introduces several key features aimed at improving reliability and trust in the Agent OS workflow:
- **Evidence-Based Development**: Enforces proof of completion in PRs.
- **No-Quick-Fixes Policy**: Prevents shortcuts without explicit approval.
- **Context-Aware Workflow Enforcement**: Allows maintenance on dirty workspaces while blocking new work until hygiene is clean.
- **Project Configuration Memory**: Enhances consistency in project configurations.
- **Instruction Structure Updates**: Restores core instructions as the source of truth with new requirements.

Additionally, the versioning system has been standardized, and the CLI has been updated to reflect these changes.

docs/AUDIT_RESULTS.md, after:

## Agent OS System Audit Results

Date: 2025-08-11

This report documents the current state of the Agent OS installation, execution paths, identified problems, and a cleanup and verification plan. Per the audit instructions, no fixes were performed; only observation and documentation.

> Update Note (2025-08-17): As of v4.0.0, the canonical version file is `~/.agent-os/VERSION` (uppercase). The installer removes legacy `~/.agent-os/.version`. Other items in this report reflect the historical state at the time of audit.

### 1) Current State Inventory

#### 1.1 Files discovered (aos-related)

```
/Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/.version
/Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh
/Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/tools/aos-background
/Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4
```

#### 1.2 Version files and contents

```
ls -la ~/.agent-os/.version ~/.agent-os/VERSION
.rw-r--r--@ 6 dalecarman 11 Aug 04:53 /Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/.version
.rw-r--r--@ 6 dalecarman 11 Aug 05:01 /Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/VERSION

cat ~/.agent-os/.version
2.1.0

cat ~/.agent-os/VERSION
2.2.0
```

Observation: Two version files exist with different values.

#### 1.3 Shell configuration references

`~/.zshrc` contains quick-init sourcing:

```
# Agent OS Quick Init Alias
if [ -f "$HOME/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh" ]; then
  source "$HOME/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh"
fi
```

`~/.bashrc` contains the same block:

```
# Agent OS Quick Init Alias
if [ -f "$HOME/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh" ]; then
  source "$HOME/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh"
fi
```

#### 1.4 What `aos` resolves to

```
type aos
aos is a shell function from /Users/dalecarman/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh

alias aos
<no alias defined>

command -v aos-v4
<not on PATH>
```

Observation: `aos` is a shell function (not an alias). It locates and executes `~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4` directly.

#### 1.5 Installation directories and tools

```
ls -la ~/.agent-os
... (includes) ...
.version
VERSION
tools/

ls -la ~/.agent-os/tools
agentos-alias.sh
aos-background
aos-v4
```

#### 1.6 Remote version information (GitHub)

```
GitHub VERSION: 2.2.0
Latest release tag: v2.2.0
```

#### 1.7 CLI status output

```
~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4 status
🔍 Agent OS Status Report
=========================

Global Installation:
✅ Installed at ~/.agent-os
✅ Version is current

Components:
✅ Instructions installed
✅ Standards installed
✅ Workflow modules installed
✅ Hooks installed

Project Setup:
ℹ️  Type: both
⚠️  Issues found:
   ⚠️  Claude commands not configured
   ⚠️  Cursor rules outdated
✅ Product documentation exists

Background Tasks:
ℹ️  Tasks: 0 running, 3 total
```

### 2) Execution Flow Diagram (Actual Behavior)

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  A[User types 'aos'] --> B{Shell resolves}
  B -->|function| C[/~/.agent-os/tools/agentos-alias.sh/]
  C --> D{Locate aos-v4}
  D -->|exists| E[/~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4/]
  D -->|not found but on PATH| F[aos-v4]
  D -->|none| G[Download latest aos-v4 to /tmp and execute]
  E --> H[aos-v4 main]
  F --> H[aos-v4 main]
  G --> H[aos-v4 main]

  subgraph aos-v4 key flows
    H --> I[check_for_updates]
    I --> J{Compare versions}
    J -->|current| K[print 'up to date']
    J -->|not installed| L[print 'not installed']
    J -->|outdated| M[smart_update: prompt user]
    M --> N[if yes: curl setup.sh --overwrite | bash]
    N --> O[setup.sh writes ~/.agent-os/VERSION=2.2.0 and installs tools]
  end

  subgraph setup.sh
    O --> P[Download standards/instructions/tools]
    O --> Q[Write VERSION (uppercase)]
    O --> R[Suggest install-aos-alias.sh]
  end
```

Supporting code observations:
- `tools/agentos-alias.sh` defines a shell function `aos` that executes `aos-v4` (or downloads it if missing).
- `tools/aos-v4` function `check_for_updates` reads `~/.agent-os/VERSION` and compares to remote `VERSION` (no use of `~/.agent-os/.version`).
- `setup.sh` writes only `~/.agent-os/VERSION` (uppercase) to `2.2.0` and does not remove `.version`.
- `tools/install-aos-alias.sh` appends a sourcing block to `~/.zshrc`/`~/.bashrc` and checks only for an existing literal function/alias, not for the sourcing block itself.

### 3) Problem Analysis

1. Problem: Dual version files with mismatch
   - Current State: `~/.agent-os/.version` = 2.1.0; `~/.agent-os/VERSION` = 2.2.0
   - Desired State: Only `~/.agent-os/VERSION` exists and is authoritative
   - Impact: Confusion and risk of scripts/tools reading stale `.version`
   - Fix Required: Remove `.version`; standardize all tools on `VERSION` (uppercase). Ensure setup removes `.version`.

2. Problem: `aos` is a shell function (caching risk)
   - Current State: `aos` is defined via `tools/agentos-alias.sh` as a function
   - Desired State: `aos` should be a simple alias to `~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4`
   - Impact: Shell function caching can persist old logic; harder to ensure fresh behavior across sessions
   - Fix Required: Replace function-based approach with alias or direct PATH shim to `aos-v4`; eliminate function to avoid caching issues.

3. Problem: Alias installer can append duplicates
   - Current State: `tools/install-aos-alias.sh` checks for `function aos()` or `alias aos=` but not for the sourcing block marker; if only the sourcing block exists, repeated runs will append duplicates
   - Desired State: Idempotent installer that detects and avoids duplicate blocks (by matching the marker or path)
   - Impact: Multiple identical blocks in `~/.zshrc`/`~/.bashrc`; brittle shell init
   - Fix Required: Update installer to search for the marker/sourcing lines and skip or replace safely.

4. Problem: Update flow interactive prompts can block automation
   - Current State: `smart_update` prompts `[y/N]` twice (update now? and optionally project setup)
   - Desired State: Non-interactive flag to auto-accept, or separate command for unattended updates
   - Impact: Automated update flows (CI/devcontainers/scripts) may hang
   - Fix Required: Add `--yes`/`--non-interactive` to `aos-v4 update` path.
   - Status (2025-08-17): `aos update` supports `--yes/--non-interactive`.

5. Problem: Project vs Global messaging is ambiguous
   - Current State: `status` reports issues like “Claude commands not configured” / “Cursor rules outdated”; menu text says “Project setup needs updates” without specific remediation mapping in CLI
   - Desired State: Clear mapping of reported issues to actionable steps and commands
   - Impact: Users may not understand what to run to resolve reported issues
   - Fix Required: Enhance `check_project_currency` messages and provide automatic or guided remediation steps.

6. Problem: PATH exposure of `aos-v4`
   - Current State: `aos-v4` isn’t placed on PATH; resolution relies on the function wrapper
   - Desired State: Either install a PATH shim (e.g., `~/bin/aos`) or ensure alias points directly to the executable
   - Impact: Tools/scripts that call `aos-v4` by name won’t find it unless through the wrapper
   - Fix Required: Provide a PATH-installed shim or ensure alias-only usage everywhere.

### 4) How It SHOULD Work (Intended Behavior)

#### Version Management
- Single version file: `~/.agent-os/VERSION` (uppercase)
- Format: Semantic versioning like `2.2.0` without `v`
- Updated by: `setup.sh` only
- Read by: All aos tools

#### Command Structure
- `aos` → Shell alias pointing to `~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4`
- No shell functions (to avoid caching issues)
- Direct execution path, no intermediaries

#### Update Flow
1. Check local `VERSION` against GitHub `VERSION`
2. If outdated, download and run `setup.sh`
3. `setup.sh` updates `VERSION`
4. Next check shows "up to date"

#### Project vs Global
- Global: `~/.agent-os/` installation
- Project: `.agent-os/` in current directory
- Clear separation of concerns

### 5) Cleanup Steps

#### Step 1: Remove Redundancies
- [ ] Delete `~/.agent-os/.version` (keep only `VERSION`)
- [ ] Deduplicate any repeated quick-init sourcing blocks in `~/.zshrc` and `~/.bashrc`
- [ ] Verify: Only one version file exists and only one quick-init block remains per shell config

#### Step 2: Standardize Version Checking
- [ ] Ensure all scripts and tooling reference `~/.agent-os/VERSION` only
- [ ] Normalize version format (no `v` prefix internally)
- [ ] Verify: `aos status` shows "Version is current" with a matching local/remote value

#### Step 3: Fix Shell Integration
- [ ] Replace function-based `aos` with a simple alias (or PATH shim) pointing to `aos-v4`
- [ ] Update `install-aos-alias.sh` to be idempotent (detect/avoid duplicate inserts)
- [ ] Verify: New shells resolve `aos` as an alias; no shell function remains

#### Step 4: Improve Update UX
- [ ] Add non-interactive flag for `aos update` to support automation
- [ ] Verify: Running update with a flag performs unattended update and exits 0

#### Step 5: Clarify Project vs Global Remediation
- [ ] Map each `check_project_currency` issue to clear remediation commands in CLI output
- [ ] Verify: `aos status` guidance is actionable and resolves issues when followed

### 6) Verification Checklist

- Version file consistency
  - Run: `ls -la ~/.agent-os/.version ~/.agent-os/VERSION 2>/dev/null`
  - Expect: Only `VERSION` exists; contents match remote `VERSION`

- Shell resolution of `aos`
  - Run: `type aos` and `alias aos`
  - Expect: `aos` is an alias; no shell function

- Update check logic
  - Run: `~/.agent-os/tools/aos-v4 status`
  - Expect: "Version is current" when local equals remote

- Alias installer idempotency
  - Run installer twice; grep config for duplicates
  - Expect: Single quick-init block remains

- Automation readiness
  - Run: `aos update --yes` (or equivalent)
  - Expect: No prompts; exit code 0 on success

### 7) Testing Plan (End-to-End Scenarios)

1. Fresh installation
   - Remove `~/.agent-os/`
   - Install via `setup.sh`
   - Verify `VERSION`, tools, and alias installed; `aos status` current

2. Update from an older version
   - Set `VERSION` to an older value
   - Run `aos update` (interactive and non-interactive)
   - Verify `VERSION` updated and status current

3. Project setup (Cursor and/or Claude)
   - Run `setup-cursor.sh` and/or `setup-claude-code.sh`
   - Run `aos status`; follow remediation steps
   - Verify no issues reported after remediation

4. Background tasks
   - Run `aos run 'echo hello && sleep 1'`
   - Verify with `aos tasks`, `aos logs <id>`, and `aos stop <id>`

### 8) Success Criteria (per prompt)

- [x] Every aos-related file is documented
- [x] Execution paths are mapped
- [x] Each problem has a proposed solution
- [x] Each fix includes verification steps
- [x] End-to-end user scenarios are outlined for testing

### Notes

- No changes were made during this audit. All results above are based on observed command output and code inspection.
