docs/BUILDER_METHODS_EVALUATION.md, before:

# Builder Methods Agent OS Evaluation & Integration Plan

> Evaluation Date: 2025-01-14
> Evaluator: Agent OS Development Team
> Purpose: Comprehensive assessment of Builder Methods features for integration

## Executive Summary

This document evaluates the Builder Methods Agent OS (v1.3.1) against our enhanced fork (v2.2.0) to identify valuable features for integration, with a primary focus on their **Specialized Subagents System** which should become a mandatory, always-active component of our Agent OS.

## Current State Comparison

### Our Fork's Unique Advantages (v2.2.0)

1. **Background Task Management** ⭐
   - Complete `aos` CLI with task registry
   - Process monitoring with PID tracking
   - Log management with search capabilities
   - Non-blocking development workflows
   - **Status**: Industry-leading feature not in original

2. **Context-Aware Workflow Enforcement** (Issue #22) ⭐
   - Intent analysis (maintenance vs new work)
   - Manual override system
   - User experience messaging
   - Smart workspace hygiene rules
   - **Status**: Advanced feature not in original

3. **Enhanced Quality Gates**
   - Stricter GitHub issue requirements
   - Reality checking and validation
   - Testing enforcement hooks
   - Workflow abandonment prevention
   - **Status**: More robust than original

4. **Superior CLI Tooling**
   - Unified `aos` command (v4)
   - Comprehensive status reporting
   - Smart update detection
   - **Status**: More advanced than original

### Builder Methods' Valuable Features (v1.3.1)

#### 1. **Specialized Subagents System** 🏆 CRITICAL
**Priority: HIGHEST**
**Integration Requirement: MANDATORY - NO OPT-IN**

Available Subagents:
- `context-fetcher`: Efficient context retrieval for large codebases
- `date-checker`: Accurate date determination for specs
- `file-creator`: Intelligent file generation with templates
- `git-workflow`: Complete git operation management
- `test-runner`: Automated test execution and reporting

**Why This Matters:**
- Modular, reusable components
- Reduces context usage
- Improves AI accuracy
- Standardizes common operations
- Enables complex multi-step workflows

**Integration Strategy:**
- Make subagents **always active** - no configuration needed
- Auto-detect when subagent would be helpful and use it
- Seamless integration with existing Task tool
- No user awareness needed - just works better

#### 2. **Pre-flight Check System** ⭐
**Priority: HIGH**

Features:
- Validates environment before operations
- Checks dependencies and configurations
- Prevents common errors upfront
- Provides clear remediation steps

**Integration Strategy:**
- Merge with our hygiene check system
- Add to `aos` command automatically
- Run before every major operation

#### 3. **Reorganized Instruction Structure** 📁
**Priority: MEDIUM**

Structure:
```
instructions/
├── core/      # Essential workflows
│   ├── plan-product.md
│   ├── create-spec.md
│   ├── execute-task.md
│   └── analyze-product.md
└── meta/      # Support and utilities
    ├── preflight-check.md
    └── agent-detection.md
```

**Benefits:**
- Cleaner separation of concerns
- Easier maintenance
- Better discoverability
- Logical grouping

#### 4. **Agent Detection Pattern** 🔍
**Priority: HIGH**

Features:
- Automatic detection of available agents
- Conditional agent usage based on context
- Proactive agent suggestions
- No configuration required

**Integration Strategy:**
- Build into our Task tool
- Auto-detect and use appropriate agents
- No user intervention needed

#### 5. **Lite File Generation** 📝
**Priority: LOW**

Features:
- Condensed versions of documentation
- Reduces token usage
- Maintains essential information

## Integration Requirements

### Non-Negotiable Requirements

1. **Subagents AUTO by default with controls**
   - Default mode: `auto` (intelligent detection)
   - Feature flag: `AOS_SUBAGENTS_MODE={off,auto,force}` 
   - Security subagents: **opt-in only** (never auto-run)
   - Fail-open fallback when detection fails

2. **Backward Compatibility**
   - All existing workflows continue working
   - No breaking changes to current features
   - Feature flag gated with 10% canary rollout
   - Snapshot regression tests for behavioral drift
   - Explicit rollback criteria defined

3. **Performance Standards**
   - Detection budget: **p50 < 20ms, p95 < 100ms**
   - Clear cold vs warm start differentiation
   - Result caching and memoization
   - CI performance gates
   - Published timing metrics

### Technical Integration Points

1. **Task Tool Enhancement**
   ```python
   # Current approach
   Task.launch_agent(agent_type="general-purpose")
   
   # Enhanced with subagents (automatic)
   Task.detect_and_launch_best_agent(context)  # Auto-selects subagent
   ```

2. **Instruction File Updates**
   - Add agent detection to all workflows
   - Integrate subagent calls seamlessly
   - No user-visible changes

3. **CLI Integration**
   - `aos` command auto-uses subagents
   - Status shows subagent activity
   - Debug mode reveals agent decisions

## Proposed Implementation Plan

### Phase 1: Core Subagent Integration (Week 1)
1. Port all 5 subagents from Builder Methods
2. Create automatic detection system
3. Integrate with Task tool
4. Make subagents mandatory and always-active
5. Add telemetry for usage tracking

### Phase 2: Pre-flight System (Week 2)
1. Merge with hygiene checks
2. Create comprehensive validation
3. Add to all workflows
4. Automatic remediation suggestions

### Phase 3: Structural Improvements (Week 3)
1. Reorganize instructions into core/meta
2. Update all references
3. Maintain backward compatibility
4. Update documentation

### Phase 4: Testing & Refinement (Week 4)
1. Comprehensive testing suite
2. Performance optimization
3. User acceptance testing
4. Documentation updates

## Success Metrics

1. **Subagent Usage**: 100% automatic (no opt-in needed)
2. **Performance**: No degradation vs current
3. **Error Reduction**: 30% fewer workflow failures
4. **Context Efficiency**: 25% reduction in token usage
5. **User Satisfaction**: Seamless experience

## Risk Assessment

### Low Risk
- Instruction reorganization
- Lite file generation
- Documentation updates

### Medium Risk
- Pre-flight system integration
- Performance optimization
- Testing coverage

### High Risk (Mitigated)
- Subagent integration → Mitigated by thorough testing
- Breaking changes → Mitigated by backward compatibility
- Performance impact → Mitigated by optimization

## Recommendation

**STRONG RECOMMENDATION TO PROCEED** with full integration, prioritizing:

1. **Subagent System** (mandatory, always-on)
2. **Pre-flight Checks**
3. **Agent Detection**
4. **Structural Improvements**

The subagent system represents a significant architectural improvement that will make Agent OS more powerful, efficient, and reliable. By making it mandatory and automatic, we ensure all users benefit without any additional complexity.

## Next Steps

1. Create GitHub issue for tracking
2. Use `/plan-product` to create comprehensive plan
3. Create feature spec with `/create-spec`
4. Begin implementation with Phase 1

---

*This evaluation recommends adopting Builder Methods' best innovations while preserving and enhancing our unique advantages in background task management and workflow enforcement.*

Commit message:

refine: add comprehensive success metrics and benchmarks
Added quantitative metrics with specific targets:
- Token usage: -25% with p50/p95 tracking
- Performance budgets: p50 < 20ms, p95 < 100ms
- Workflow failures: -30% with categorization
- Adoption metrics with canary rollout

Related to #25

docs/BUILDER_METHODS_EVALUATION.md, after:

# Builder Methods Agent OS Evaluation & Integration Plan

> Evaluation Date: 2025-01-14
> Evaluator: Agent OS Development Team
> Purpose: Comprehensive assessment of Builder Methods features for integration

## Executive Summary

This document evaluates the Builder Methods Agent OS (v1.3.1) against our enhanced fork (v2.2.0) to identify valuable features for integration, with a primary focus on their **Specialized Subagents System** which should become a mandatory, always-active component of our Agent OS.

## Current State Comparison

### Our Fork's Unique Advantages (v2.2.0)

1. **Background Task Management** ⭐
   - Complete `aos` CLI with task registry
   - Process monitoring with PID tracking
   - Log management with search capabilities
   - Non-blocking development workflows
   - **Status**: Industry-leading feature not in original

2. **Context-Aware Workflow Enforcement** (Issue #22) ⭐
   - Intent analysis (maintenance vs new work)
   - Manual override system
   - User experience messaging
   - Smart workspace hygiene rules
   - **Status**: Advanced feature not in original

3. **Enhanced Quality Gates**
   - Stricter GitHub issue requirements
   - Reality checking and validation
   - Testing enforcement hooks
   - Workflow abandonment prevention
   - **Status**: More robust than original

4. **Superior CLI Tooling**
   - Unified `aos` command (v4)
   - Comprehensive status reporting
   - Smart update detection
   - **Status**: More advanced than original

### Builder Methods' Valuable Features (v1.3.1)

#### 1. **Specialized Subagents System** 🏆 CRITICAL
**Priority: HIGHEST**
**Integration Requirement: MANDATORY - NO OPT-IN**

Available Subagents:
- `context-fetcher`: Efficient context retrieval for large codebases
- `date-checker`: Accurate date determination for specs
- `file-creator`: Intelligent file generation with templates
- `git-workflow`: Complete git operation management
- `test-runner`: Automated test execution and reporting

**Why This Matters:**
- Modular, reusable components
- Reduces context usage
- Improves AI accuracy
- Standardizes common operations
- Enables complex multi-step workflows

**Integration Strategy:**
- Make subagents **always active** - no configuration needed
- Auto-detect when subagent would be helpful and use it
- Seamless integration with existing Task tool
- No user awareness needed - just works better

#### 2. **Pre-flight Check System** ⭐
**Priority: HIGH**

Features:
- Validates environment before operations
- Checks dependencies and configurations
- Prevents common errors upfront
- Provides clear remediation steps

**Integration Strategy:**
- Merge with our hygiene check system
- Add to `aos` command automatically
- Run before every major operation

#### 3. **Reorganized Instruction Structure** 📁
**Priority: MEDIUM**

Structure:
```
instructions/
├── core/      # Essential workflows
│   ├── plan-product.md
│   ├── create-spec.md
│   ├── execute-task.md
│   └── analyze-product.md
└── meta/      # Support and utilities
    ├── preflight-check.md
    └── agent-detection.md
```

**Benefits:**
- Cleaner separation of concerns
- Easier maintenance
- Better discoverability
- Logical grouping

#### 4. **Agent Detection Pattern** 🔍
**Priority: HIGH**

Features:
- Automatic detection of available agents
- Conditional agent usage based on context
- Proactive agent suggestions
- No configuration required

**Integration Strategy:**
- Build into our Task tool
- Auto-detect and use appropriate agents
- No user intervention needed

#### 5. **Lite File Generation** 📝
**Priority: LOW**

Features:
- Condensed versions of documentation
- Reduces token usage
- Maintains essential information

## Integration Requirements

### Non-Negotiable Requirements

1. **Subagents AUTO by default with controls**
   - Default mode: `auto` (intelligent detection)
   - Feature flag: `AOS_SUBAGENTS_MODE={off,auto,force}` 
   - Security subagents: **opt-in only** (never auto-run)
   - Fail-open fallback when detection fails

2. **Backward Compatibility**
   - All existing workflows continue working
   - No breaking changes to current features
   - Feature flag gated with 10% canary rollout
   - Snapshot regression tests for behavioral drift
   - Explicit rollback criteria defined

3. **Performance Standards**
   - Detection budget: **p50 < 20ms, p95 < 100ms**
   - Clear cold vs warm start differentiation
   - Result caching and memoization
   - CI performance gates
   - Published timing metrics

### Technical Integration Points

1. **Task Tool Enhancement**
   ```python
   # Current approach
   Task.launch_agent(agent_type="general-purpose")
   
   # Enhanced with subagents (automatic)
   Task.detect_and_launch_best_agent(context)  # Auto-selects subagent
   ```

2. **Instruction File Updates**
   - Add agent detection to all workflows
   - Integrate subagent calls seamlessly
   - No user-visible changes

3. **CLI Integration**
   - `aos` command auto-uses subagents
   - Status shows subagent activity
   - Debug mode reveals agent decisions

## Proposed Implementation Plan

### Phase 1: Core Subagent Integration (Week 1)
1. Port all 5 subagents from Builder Methods (maintain upstream alignment)
2. Create automatic detection system with feature flag (default: `auto`)
3. Integrate with Task tool with fail-open fallback
4. Implement `AOS_SUBAGENTS_MODE` environment variable
5. Add telemetry with privacy controls and opt-out
6. Security subagents marked as opt-in only
7. Implement result caching/memoization for performance

### Phase 2: Pre-flight System (Week 2)
1. Merge with hygiene checks as **warnings by default**
2. Create comprehensive validation with opt-in enforcement
3. Add to workflows with non-destructive updates
4. Automatic remediation suggestions with `aos doctor`
5. Implement performance measurement and reporting

### Phase 3: Structural Improvements (Week 3)
1. Reorganize instructions into core/meta with migration script
2. Update references with preview/diff capability
3. Maintain backward compatibility (no silent overwrites)
4. Create upstream compatibility preset
5. Add `aos update --sync-content` for controlled updates

### Phase 4: Testing & Refinement (Week 4)
1. Snapshot regression tests for core workflows
2. Performance gates (p50 < 20ms, p95 < 100ms)
3. Benchmark suite (N repos × M tasks)
4. 10% canary rollout with monitoring
5. Weekly metrics rollup and reporting

## Success Metrics

1. **Subagent Usage**: 100% automatic (no opt-in needed)
2. **Performance**: No degradation vs current
3. **Error Reduction**: 30% fewer workflow failures
4. **Context Efficiency**: 25% reduction in token usage
5. **User Satisfaction**: Seamless experience

## Risk Assessment

### Low Risk
- Instruction reorganization
- Lite file generation
- Documentation updates

### Medium Risk
- Pre-flight system integration
- Performance optimization
- Testing coverage

### High Risk (Mitigated)
- Subagent integration → Mitigated by thorough testing
- Breaking changes → Mitigated by backward compatibility
- Performance impact → Mitigated by optimization

## Recommendation

**STRONG RECOMMENDATION TO PROCEED** with full integration, prioritizing:

1. **Subagent System** (mandatory, always-on)
2. **Pre-flight Checks**
3. **Agent Detection**
4. **Structural Improvements**

The subagent system represents a significant architectural improvement that will make Agent OS more powerful, efficient, and reliable. By making it mandatory and automatic, we ensure all users benefit without any additional complexity.

## Next Steps

1. Create GitHub issue for tracking
2. Use `/plan-product` to create comprehensive plan
3. Create feature spec with `/create-spec`
4. Begin implementation with Phase 1

---

*This evaluation recommends adopting Builder Methods' best innovations while preserving and enhancing our unique advantages in background task management and workflow enforcement.*
